If the energy bill at your property is in your name, you can decide whether to get a smart meter installed, but we recommend letting your landlord know first. Smart Energy GB have provided an email template and a letter template you can use.

If the energy bill is in your landlord's name, it's their decision, but you can still ask.

From time to time you might see an error message in your usage graphs that says Your readings are on the way.

It can take a few days for your meter readings to come through to us. If you still don’t see readings after a couple of days, there could be an issue.  

There’s a connection issue with your meter’s ‘comms hub’

The ‘comms hub’ on your meter shares any usage information with us. If you aren’t receiving any bills at all, get in touch with us so we can look into it. 

We’re only receiving some of your meter readings

If we’ve stopped receiving your readings, or we’re only receiving some of your half hourly readings, you won’t be able to see your usage graphs and you might see missing readings on your statement. Get in touch with us if you stop receiving bills.

We’ve stopped sending you bills

If you aren’t receiving any bills from us you won’t be able to see any data in your usage graphs. We can still send you bills for your usage using the meter readings you send us, unless you’re on one of our smart tariffs.

If you haven’t received a bill for a while, get in touch at hello@octopus.energy.

No, you don't have to have a smart meter installed.

We heartily recommend you do, though, as they'll save you a lot of time and hassle, and can even help you use less energy and at cheaper times.

The standard meter you have in your home uses technology that's decades old. With so much of our everyday lives reliant on energy, it makes sense to use the best technology to manage it.

And it's becoming increasingly difficult to source standard meters. They're slowly becoming obsolete as fewer manufacturers are making them, and fewer people want them.

If your standard meter breaks, it could be challenging (for any supplier) to find another standard meter to replace it.

To learn more about smart meters, visit our blog.

We pass savings to customers however we can, and different methods of payment are more expensive for us to manage.

Not having a Direct Debit (and instead Paying on Receipt of your Bill) costs us more in admin and managing your account. We don't think it's fair to make everyone cover that extra cost, so we sometimes have cheaper rates for those who choose to pay by Direct Debit.

Because we operate a lean and efficient business you’ll still get a great price if you choose to pay a different way.

Want to set up a Direct Debit?

It's super easy to do in seconds using your online account here.

If you have a smart meter, you’ll receive a statement every month. If you’d like to change the date you receive your statements, get in touch to let us know.

If you have a non-smart meter, we do things a little differently. We won’t send you a statement every month. Instead, you can send us your readings and we’ll send you a statement within a few days. If you don’t send us readings, we’ll send you an estimated bill every three months.

We do it this way because we want to avoid estimating your energy usage where possible. Real meter readings make your statements a lot more accurate. There’s more information about why we don’t send monthly statements on our blog. 

We’ve worked hard to make our energy statements as clear and simple as possible. But, if there’s anything you’re not sure about or something doesn’t look right – whether there’s an unexpected charge or credit, missing charges, or you’re waiting for a £50 referral reward – we can help.

Head to our handy guide to Understanding your energy statement, which also includes a downloadable sample bill with handy annotations and tips.

We’ve worked hard to make our energy statements as clear and simple as possible. But, if there’s anything you’re not sure about or something doesn’t look right – whether there’s an unexpected charge or credit, missing charges, or you’re waiting for a £50 referral reward – we can help.

Head to our handy guide to Understanding your energy statement, which also includes a downloadable sample bill with handy annotations and tips.

